GramsReadoutSim/README.md, before:

# GramsReadoutSim
*Author: Satoshi Takashima*

The purpose of this program is to model the readout geometry of the GRAMS detector. 

As of Nov-2022, it's anticipated that the readout of the GRAMS LArTPC will be a pixel detector. However, other LArTPC detectors have used wires, and in the future yet another charge readout technologies may be developed. Hence the readout system is modeled in a program of its own. 

In [`GramsDetSim`](../GramsDetSim), the ionization left by charged-particle tracks was divided into electron clusters and drifted to the anode of the LArTPC. `GramsReadoutSim` assigns a pixel ID to each cluster, with the pixel ID defined as an integer pair in (x,y).

| <img src="PixelSketch.png" width="75%" /> |
| :---------------------------------------------: | 
| <small><strong>Sketch by Satoshi Takashima of the operation of `GramsReadoutSim`. Note that after he created this diagram, he choose a different scheme for assigning a pixel ID. The pixel ID is assigned as pair of integers (x,y) instead of an consecutive integer over a grid. </strong></small> |

Since the pixel readout is presently modeled as a simple 2D grid in x and y, the `GramsReadoutSim` parameters are equally simple:

- `channel_numx` and `channel_numy`: Number of channels assigned to the x and the y axes. 

- `readout_centerx` and `readout_centery`: The x- and y-offset of the center of the readout geometry from the (x=0,y=0) coordinate of the detector geometry. 

The output ntuple include the pixel ID assigned to each individual charge cluster in the input.

Commit message:

Cleaned up constructor for AssignPixelID.cc. Changed hard-coded AnodeTilePlane volume to be in options.xml instead. Renamed channel_numx to x_resolution since that is less confusing. Updated docs to reflect all of this

GramsReadoutSim/README.md, after:

# GramsReadoutSim
*Author: Satoshi Takashima*

The purpose of this program is to model the readout geometry of the GRAMS detector. 

As of Nov-2022, it's anticipated that the readout of the GRAMS LArTPC will be a pixel detector. However, other LArTPC detectors have used wires, and in the future yet another charge readout technologies may be developed. Hence the readout system is modeled in a program of its own. 

In [`GramsDetSim`](../GramsDetSim), the ionization left by charged-particle tracks was divided into electron clusters and drifted to the anode of the LArTPC. `GramsReadoutSim` assigns a pixel ID to each cluster, with the pixel ID defined as an integer pair in (x,y).

| <img src="PixelSketch.png" width="75%" /> |
| :---------------------------------------------: | 
| <small><strong>Sketch by Satoshi Takashima of the operation of `GramsReadoutSim`. Note that after he created this diagram, he choose a different scheme for assigning a pixel ID. The pixel ID is assigned as pair of integers (x,y) instead of an consecutive integer over a grid. </strong></small> |

Since the pixel readout is presently modeled as a simple 2D grid in x and y, the `GramsReadoutSim` parameters are equally simple:

- `gdml` : The ROOT-compatible gdml file emitted by GramsG4

- `anodeTileVolume`: The volume in gdml file that corresponds to Anode Tile plane. You extract the dimensions of the pixel grid from this

- `x_resolution` and `y_resolution`: Number of pixels along the x/y direction(s)

- `readout_centerx` and `readout_centery`: The x- and y-offset of the center of the readout geometry from the (x=0,y=0) coordinate of the detector geometry. 

The output ntuple include the pixel ID assigned to each individual charge cluster in the input.
