scripts/README.md, before:

# GramsSim scripts

_If you want a formatted (or easier-to-read) version of this file, scroll to the bottom of [`GramsSim/README.md`](../README.md) for instructions. If you're reading this on github, then it's already formatted._

This directory contains utility scripts to help work with GramsSim
inputs and outputs. Some of the programs are provided solely to teach
programming concepts for folks new to:

- C++
- ROOT
- handling TTrees, both individually and as friends
- GDML (Geant4 geometry)
- HepMC3 (particle-physics file format)

For examples related to working with Geant4 and GramsG4, see [`GramsSim/mac`](../mac).

- The key example files require a [dictionary](../GramsDataObj) to read `GramsSim` output files. See [GramsDataObj](../GramsDataObj) for details. 

- If you add scripts/programs to this directory that require [HepMC3][10], [cfitsio][17], or [healpix][18], be sure to edit the [CMakeLists.txt](./CMakeLists.txt) file. This is to prevent those programs from being compiled on systems that don't have these libraries installed.  

[10]: https://gitlab.cern.ch/hepmc/HepMC3
[17]: https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/fitsio/
[18]: https://healpix.jpl.nasa.gov/

## Examples

[`SimpleAnalysis.C`](./SimpleAnalysis.C) - a simple example of how to look at the trees
produced by gramsg4 using a ROOT macro. Note how this macro depends
on [GramsSim/rootlogon.C](../rootlogon.C), which loads the
[dictionary](../GramsDataObj) when you start an
interactive ROOT session.

[`SimpleAnalysis.py`](./SimpleAnalysis.py) - a Python script that performs the
same function as `SimpleAnalysis.C`. 

[`dEdxExample.cc`](dEdxExample.cc) - An example of how to read a map-based branch in one
of the GramsSim output files.  There are lots of detailed comments in
here, to point the way to users developing code for their own tasks.

[`dEdxExample.py`](dEdxExample.py) - The same as above, in Python.

[`RadialDistance.py`](RadialDistance.py) - a more realistic example of how to look at the
trees produced by `gramsg4`.

[`AllFilesExample.cc`](AllFilesExample.cc) - An example of how to open
all the output files from all the `GramsSim` programs at once, set
them up as [friend trees][80].  This allows you to treat the entire
ensemble of `GramsSim` output files as a single structure. (As the
comments in the code warn, don't copy this blindly. Edit it down to
only read the files you need. Much of the code in the main loop serves
no useful purpose.)

[`AllFilesExample.py`](AllFilesExample.py) - The same as above, in Python. 

[`BacktrackExample.cc`](BacktrackExample.cc) - `AllFileExample` shows
how to use all the files at once to go through the GramsSim objects in
the "foward direction": tracks->hits->clusters->waveforms. This
program shows how to go in opposite direction:
waveforms->clusters->hits->tracks. Again, as the comments warn, think
about what you're copying; about half the code in the analysis loop
serves no useful analysis purpose.

[`BacktrackExample.py`](Backtrackxample.py) - The same as above, in Python. 

[80]: https://root.cern/manual/trees/#widening-a-ttree-through-friends

[`Hist2Text.C`](Hist2Text.C) - converts a ROOT histogram into the simple text format
used by Geant4's General Particle Source system. Any `.root` or `.txt`
files in this directory are used as example inputs and outputs for
`Hist2Text.C`.

[`gdmlsearch.cc`](gdmlsearch.cc) - an example of how to use ROOT to search through a
geometry specified in GDML and extract information from it.

## HepMC3 tests

The following C++ programs are intended as simple examples of handling
event creation in HepMC3. Note that the examples in
${HepMC3_ROOT_DIR}/share/doc/HepMC3/examples are better illustrations,
but they don't necessarily produce outputs that are useful for
[`GramsG4`](../GramsG4).

The compiled programs are put into the bin/ sub-directory of your
GramsG4 working/build directory. To execute them, you'll want 
something like:

    # Go to your GramsG4 build directory
    ./bin/hepmc-grams-example

The programs are:

`hepmc-grams-example` - Creates a few example events "by hand" and
writes them to a file.

`hepmc-convert` - Converts one HepMC3-format file to another HepMC3
format. See the main README.md file for a list of available formats
and other notes.

`example.hepmc3` - a file of a few events in HepMC3 format.

Commit message:

Add skyview as a new example

scripts/README.md, after:

# GramsSim scripts

_If you want a formatted (or easier-to-read) version of this file, scroll to the bottom of [`GramsSim/README.md`](../README.md) for instructions. If you're reading this on github, then it's already formatted._

This directory contains utility scripts to help work with GramsSim
inputs and outputs. Some of the programs are provided solely to teach
programming concepts for folks new to:

- C++
- ROOT
- handling TTrees, both individually and as friends
- GDML (Geant4 geometry)
- HepMC3 (particle-physics file format)

For examples related to working with Geant4 and GramsG4, see [`GramsSim/mac`](../mac).

- The key example files require a [dictionary](../GramsDataObj) to read `GramsSim` output files. See [GramsDataObj](../GramsDataObj) for details. 

- If you add scripts/programs to this directory that require [HepMC3][10], [cfitsio][17], or [healpix][18], be sure to edit the [CMakeLists.txt](./CMakeLists.txt) file. This is to prevent those programs from being compiled on systems that don't have these libraries installed.  

[10]: https://gitlab.cern.ch/hepmc/HepMC3
[17]: https://heasarc.gsfc.nasa.gov/fitsio/
[18]: https://healpix.jpl.nasa.gov/

## Examples

[`SimpleAnalysis.C`](./SimpleAnalysis.C) - A simple example of how to look at the trees
produced by gramsg4 using a ROOT macro. Note how this macro depends
on [GramsSim/rootlogon.C](../rootlogon.C), which loads the
[dictionary](../GramsDataObj) when you start an
interactive ROOT session.

[`SimpleAnalysis.py`](./SimpleAnalysis.py) - A Python script that performs the
same function as `SimpleAnalysis.C`. 

[`skyview.C`](./skyview.C) - Another simple example. This creates a 3D histogram of the
primary particles in the [GramsG4](../GramsG4) output file.

[`skyview.py`](./skyview.py) - A Python script that performs a similar
function as `skyview.C`. 

[`dEdxExample.cc`](dEdxExample.cc) - An example of how to read a map-based branch in one
of the GramsSim output files.  There are lots of detailed comments in
here, to point the way to users developing code for their own tasks.

[`dEdxExample.py`](dEdxExample.py) - The same as above, in Python.

[`RadialDistance.py`](RadialDistance.py) - A more realistic example of how to look at the
trees produced by `gramsg4`.

[`AllFilesExample.cc`](AllFilesExample.cc) - An example of how to open
all the output files from all the `GramsSim` programs at once, set
them up as [friend trees][80].  This allows you to treat the entire
ensemble of `GramsSim` output files as a single structure. (As the
comments in the code warn, don't copy this blindly. Edit it down to
only read the files you need. Much of the code in the main loop serves
no useful purpose.)

[`AllFilesExample.py`](AllFilesExample.py) - The same as above, in Python. 

[`BacktrackExample.cc`](BacktrackExample.cc) - `AllFileExample` shows
how to use all the files at once to go through the GramsSim objects in
the "foward direction": tracks->hits->clusters->waveforms. This
program shows how to go in opposite direction:
waveforms->clusters->hits->tracks. Again, as the comments warn, think
about what you're copying; about half the code in the analysis loop
serves no useful purpose.

[`BacktrackExample.py`](Backtrackxample.py) - The same as above, in Python. 

[80]: https://root.cern/manual/trees/#widening-a-ttree-through-friends

[`Hist2Text.C`](Hist2Text.C) - Converts a ROOT histogram into the simple text format
used by Geant4's General Particle Source system. Any `.root` or `.txt`
files in this directory are used as example inputs and outputs for
`Hist2Text.C`.

[`gdmlsearch.cc`](gdmlsearch.cc) - An example of how to use ROOT to search through a
geometry specified in GDML and extract information from it.

## HepMC3 tests

The following C++ programs are intended as simple examples of handling
event creation in HepMC3. Note that the examples in
${HepMC3_ROOT_DIR}/share/doc/HepMC3/examples are better illustrations,
but they don't necessarily produce outputs that are useful for
[`GramsG4`](../GramsG4).

The compiled programs are put into the bin/ sub-directory of your
GramsG4 working/build directory. To execute them, you'll want 
something like:

    # Go to your GramsG4 build directory
    ./bin/hepmc-grams-example

The programs are:

`hepmc-grams-example` - Creates a few example events "by hand" and
writes them to a file.

`hepmc-convert` - Converts one HepMC3-format file to another HepMC3
format. See the main README.md file for a list of available formats
and other notes.

`example.hepmc3` - a file of a few events in HepMC3 format.
