GramsDetSim/README.md, before:

# GramsDetSim

- [GramsDetSim](#gramsdetsim)
  * [Overview](#overview)
  * [Running `GramsDetSim`](#running--gramsdetsim-)
  * [Detector-response functions](#detector-response-functions)
    + [Recombination](#recombination)
    + [Absorption](#absorption)
    + [Diffusion](#diffusion)

<small><i><a href='http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc/'>Table of contents generated with markdown-toc</a></i></small>

[`GramsG4`](../GramsG4) propagates particles as they pass through the
detector, recording the amount of ionization they deposit in the
liquid argon. The next step in modeling the detector is to propagate
that ionization to the GRAMS readout.

In theory, one might set up Geant4 to transport each individual
electron liberated by ionization to the readout plane. In practice,
this would take too long. Instead, we use `GramsDetSim` to model the
drifting of the ionization electrons in the LArTPC.

Note that this program does _not_ model the effects of the readout geometry or electronics. That's handled in a subsequent step. 

## Overview

Like the other [GramsSim](../) programs, `GramsDetSim` uses the
[`options XML file`](../util/README.md) to control its processing. The
parameters that control the program are under active development, so
it's a good idea to read the file [`options.xml`](../options.xml) and
pay attention to the comments.

In particular, many of the parameters used in the models described
below depend on the choice of units. It's up to you to make sure that
that units used for (e.g.,) option `birks_kB` match the options
`LengthUnit`, `TimeUnit`, and `EnergyUnit` at the top of the XML file.

## Running `GramsDetSim`

From your project build directory (see
[`GramsSim/README.md`](../README.md)) you can run this program with

```
./gramsdetsim
```

This program will read in an ntuple file created by the `GramsG4`
simulation and create a "friend ntuple" to the `GramsG4`'s "hits"
ntuple. In other words, the ntuple created by this program will
contain, row-by-row, the hit energy adjusted by the detector response.

See `GramsSim/util/README.md` for a description of how to control the
operation of `gramsdetsim` through the [`options.xml`](../options.xml) file and the
command line.

## Detector-response functions

Again recall that the parameters for all of the following functions can be found in the `options.xml` file. 

### Recombination

"Recombination" is a model of the effects of electrons returning to
atoms after being liberated through ionization.

As of Sep-2022, the recombination models and parameters used in GramsDetSim are based
on these papers:

- [A study of electron recombination using highly ionizing
particles in the ArgoNeuT Liquid Argon TPC][10]

- [Study of electron recombination in liquid argon with the ICARUS TPC][11]. 

[10]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.1712
[11]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900204000506

The specific recombination model is selected by the parameter `RecombinationModel` in [`options.xml`](../options.xml). That parameters selects between two functional forms:

- Modified box model

<img src="BoxModel.png" width="25%"/>

- Birk's model

<img src="BirksModel.png" width="35%"/>

where:

- _&beta;'_, _&alpha;_, A<sub>B</sub>, and k<sub>B</sub> are material- and detector-based parameters that must be measured empirically;

- _&epsilon;_ is the electric field;

- _&xi;_ is the effective electric field;

- _&rho;_ is the density of the liquid argon;

- dE/dx is the ionization energy per unit length.

(Note: Here, dE/dx is the quantity computed in the program code, that is, energy per unit length. In the papers referenced above, dE/dx is the "stopping power", defined as deposited energy divided by material density per unit length. To go from one to the other, (1/_&rho;_)(dE/dx)<sub>code</sub> = (dE/dx)<sub>papers</sub>.)

See the [options XML](../options.xml) file for the values of the
individual parameters.

### Absorption

Absorption models the effects of ionized electrons being absorbed by
impurities in the liquid argon (such as oxygen and water) as the
electrons drift towards the anode of the TPC.

As of Sep-2022, the absorption model in the code is:

<img src="absorption.png" width="20%"/>

where

- s<sub>drift</sub> = the drift distance between the ionization hit in the TPC to the anode;

- v<sub>drift</sub> = the drift velocity;

- t<sub>elec</sub> = the electron lifetime in the liquid argon. 

v<sub>drift</sub> and t<sub>elec</sub> are detector- and material-dependent parameters, whose values are found in the `options.xml` file.

### Diffusion

Diffusion models the spread of the ionization electrons as they drift towards the anode. 

The procedure is to convert the ionization energy to a number of
electrons. The electrons are grouped into clusters, to save time. Then
each cluster is randomly shifted in both the transverse and
longitudinal directions of the drift.

The spread of the electron clusters is given by:

<img src="DiffusionFormulas.png" width="20%" />

where _N(a,b)_ is a normal distribution with a mean of _a_ and a width of _b_, and _D_<sub>T</sub> and _D_<sub>L</sub> are parameters supplied in the `options.xml` file. 

This is a sketch of the procedure:

|                                           |
| :---------------------------------------: | 
| <img src="Diffusion.png" width="50%" />   |


The output ntuple contains the energy, arrival time, and shifted
(x,y,z) of each individual cluster.

Commit message:

GramsDetSim may need RNG seed

GramsDetSim/README.md, after:

# GramsDetSim

- [GramsDetSim](#gramsdetsim)
  * [Overview](#overview)
  * [Running `GramsDetSim`](#running--gramsdetsim-)
  * [Detector-response functions](#detector-response-functions)
    + [Recombination](#recombination)
    + [Absorption](#absorption)
    + [Diffusion](#diffusion)

<small><i><a href='http://ecotrust-canada.github.io/markdown-toc/'>Table of contents generated with markdown-toc</a></i></small>

[`GramsG4`](../GramsG4) propagates particles as they pass through the
detector, recording the amount of ionization they deposit in the
liquid argon. The next step in modeling the detector is to propagate
that ionization to the GRAMS readout.

In theory, one might set up Geant4 to transport each individual
electron liberated by ionization to the readout plane. In practice,
this would take too long. Instead, we use `GramsDetSim` to model the
drifting of the ionization electrons in the LArTPC.

Note that this program does _not_ model the effects of the readout geometry or electronics. That's handled in a subsequent step. 

## Overview

Like the other [GramsSim](../) programs, `GramsDetSim` uses the
[`options XML file`](../util/README.md) to control its processing. The
parameters that control the program are under active development, so
it's a good idea to read the file [`options.xml`](../options.xml) and
pay attention to the comments.

In particular, many of the parameters used in the models described
below depend on the choice of units. It's up to you to make sure that
that units used for (e.g.,) option `birks_kB` match the options
`LengthUnit`, `TimeUnit`, and `EnergyUnit` at the top of the XML file.

## Running `GramsDetSim`

From your project build directory (see
[`GramsSim/README.md`](../README.md)) you can run this program with

```
./gramsdetsim
```

This program will read in an ntuple file created by the `GramsG4`
simulation and create a "friend ntuple" to the `GramsG4`'s "hits"
ntuple. In other words, the ntuple created by this program will
contain, row-by-row, the hit energy adjusted by the detector response.

See `GramsSim/util/README.md` for a description of how to control the
operation of `gramsdetsim` through the [`options.xml`](../options.xml) file and the
command line.

Note that the diffusion model (described below) makes use of a random-number generator.
If you're running `gramsdetsim` as part of a cluster of jobs, you probably want
to include a random-number seed on the command line as described [`GramsG4`](../GramsG4); e.g.,

    ./gramsdetsim --rngseed=${process}

## Detector-response functions

Again recall that the parameters for all of the following functions can be found in the `options.xml` file. 

### Recombination

"Recombination" is a model of the effects of electrons returning to
atoms after being liberated through ionization.

As of Sep-2022, the recombination models and parameters used in GramsDetSim are based
on these papers:

- [A study of electron recombination using highly ionizing
particles in the ArgoNeuT Liquid Argon TPC][10]

- [Study of electron recombination in liquid argon with the ICARUS TPC][11]. 

[10]: https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.1712
[11]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168900204000506

The specific recombination model is selected by the parameter `RecombinationModel` in [`options.xml`](../options.xml). That parameters selects between two functional forms:

- Modified box model

<img src="BoxModel.png" width="25%"/>

- Birk's model

<img src="BirksModel.png" width="35%"/>

where:

- _&beta;'_, _&alpha;_, A<sub>B</sub>, and k<sub>B</sub> are material- and detector-based parameters that must be measured empirically;

- _&epsilon;_ is the electric field;

- _&xi;_ is the effective electric field;

- _&rho;_ is the density of the liquid argon;

- dE/dx is the ionization energy per unit length.

(Note: Here, dE/dx is the quantity computed in the program code, that is, energy per unit length. In the papers referenced above, dE/dx is the "stopping power", defined as deposited energy divided by material density per unit length. To go from one to the other, (1/_&rho;_)(dE/dx)<sub>code</sub> = (dE/dx)<sub>papers</sub>.)

See the [options XML](../options.xml) file for the values of the
individual parameters.

### Absorption

Absorption models the effects of ionized electrons being absorbed by
impurities in the liquid argon (such as oxygen and water) as the
electrons drift towards the anode of the TPC.

As of Sep-2022, the absorption model in the code is:

<img src="absorption.png" width="20%"/>

where

- s<sub>drift</sub> = the drift distance between the ionization hit in the TPC to the anode;

- v<sub>drift</sub> = the drift velocity;

- t<sub>elec</sub> = the electron lifetime in the liquid argon. 

v<sub>drift</sub> and t<sub>elec</sub> are detector- and material-dependent parameters, whose values are found in the `options.xml` file.

### Diffusion

Diffusion models the spread of the ionization electrons as they drift towards the anode. 

The procedure is to convert the ionization energy to a number of
electrons. The electrons are grouped into clusters, to save time. Then
each cluster is randomly shifted in both the transverse and
longitudinal directions of the drift.

The spread of the electron clusters is given by:

<img src="DiffusionFormulas.png" width="20%" />

where _N(a,b)_ is a normal distribution with a mean of _a_ and a width of _b_, and _D_<sub>T</sub> and _D_<sub>L</sub> are parameters supplied in the `options.xml` file. 

This is a sketch of the procedure:

|                                           |
| :---------------------------------------: | 
| <img src="Diffusion.png" width="50%" />   |


The output ntuple contains the energy, arrival time, and shifted
(x,y,z) of each individual cluster.
